BOOK I
OF THE CAUSES OF IMPROVEMENT IN THE PRODUCTIVE
POWERS OF LABOUR, AND OF THE ORDER ACCORDING TO
WHICH ITS PRODUCE IS NATURALLY DISTRIBUTED AMONG
THE DIFFERENT RANKS OF THE PEOPLE
CHAPTER I
OF THE DIVISION OF LABOUR
THE greatest improvement in the productive powers of labour,
and the greater part of the skill, dexterity, and judgment with
which it is anywhere directed, or applied, seem to have been the
effects of the division of labour.
The effects of the division of labour, in the general business of
society, will be more easily understood by considering in what
manner it operates in some particular manufactures. It is com-
monly supposed to be carried furthest in some very trifling ones;
not perhaps that it really is carried further in them than in others
of more importance: but in those trifling manufactures which are
destined to supply the small wants of but a small number of
people, the whole number of workmen must necessarily be small;
and those employed in every different branch of the work can
often be collected into the same workhouse, and placed at once
under the view of the spectator. In those great manufactures, on
the contrary, which are destined to supply the great wants of the
great body of the people, every different branch of the work em-
ploys so great a number of workmen that it is impossible to collect
them all into the same workhouse. We can seldom see more, at
one time, than those employed in one single branch. Though in
such manufactures, therefore, the work may really be divided into
a much greater number of parts than in those of a more trifling
nature, the division is not near so obvious, and has accordingly
been much less observed.
THE DIVISION OF LABOUR
5
To take an example, therefore, from a very trifling manufac-
ture; but one in which the division of labour has been very often
taken notice of, the trade of the pin-maker; a workman not edu-
cated to this business (which the division of labour has rendered
a distinct trade), nor acquainted with the use of the machinery
employed in it (to the invention of which the same division of
labour has probably given occasion), could scarce, perhaps, with
his utmost industry, make one pin in a day, and certainly could
not make twenty. But in the way in which this business is now
carried on, not only the whole work is a peculiar trade, but it is
divided into a number of branches, of which the greater part are
likewise peculiar trades. One man draws out the wire, another
straights it, a third cuts it, a fourth points it, a fifth grinds it at
the top for receiving the head; to make the head requires two or
three distinct operations; to put it on is a peculiar business, to
whiten the pins is another; it is even a trade by itself to put them
into the paper; and the important business of making a pin is, in
this manner, divided into about eighteen distinct operations,
which, in some manufactories, are all performed by distinct hands,
though in others the same man will sometimes perform two or
three of them. I have seen a small manufactory of this kind where
ten men only were employed, and where some of them consequent-
ly performed two or three distinct operations. But though they were
very poor, and therefore but indifferently accommodated with the
necessary machinery, they could, when they exerted themselves,
make among them about twelve pounds of pins in a day. There are
in a pound upwards of four thousand pins of a middling size. Those
ten persons, therefore, could make among them upwards of forty-
eight thousand pins in a day. Each person, therefore, making a
tenth part of forty-eight thousand pins, might be considered as
nan
making four thousand eight hundred pins in a day. But if they had
all wrought separately and independently, and without any of them
having been educated to this peculiar business, they certainly could
not each of them have made twenty, perhaps not one pin in a day;
that is, certainly, not the two hundred and fortieth, perhaps not the
four thousand eight hundredth part of what they are at present
capable of performing, in consequence of a proper division and
combination of their different operations.
In every other art and manufacture, the effects of the division
of labour are similar to what they are in this very trifling one;
though, in many of them, the labour can neither be so much