THE WEALTH OF NATIONS
6
subdivided, nor reduced to so great a simplicity of operation. The
division of labour, however, so far as it can be introduced, occa-
sions, in every art, a proportionable increase of the productive
powers of labour. The separation of different trades and employ-
ments from one another seems to have taken place in consequence
of this advantage. This separation, too, is generally carried furthest
in those countries which enjoy the highest degree of industry and
improvement; what is the work of one man in a rude state of
society being generally that of several in an improved one. In every
improved society, the farmer is generally nothing but a farmer; the
manufacturer, nothing but a manufacturer. The labour, too, which
is necessary to produce any one complete manufacture is almost
always divided among a great number of hands. How many dif-
ferent trades are employed in each branch of the linen and woollen
manufactures from the growers of the flax and the wool, to the
bleachers and smoothers of the linen, or to the dyers and dressers
of the cloth! The nature of agriculture, indeed, does not admit of
so many subdivisions of labour, nor of so complete a separation of
one business from another, as manufactures. It is impossible to
separate so entirely the business of the grazier from that of the
corn-farmer as the trade of the carpenter is commonly separated
from that of the smith. The spinner is almost always a distinct
person from the weaver; but the ploughman, the harrower, the
sower of the seed, and the reaper of the corn, are often the same.
The occasions for those different sorts of labour returning with
the different seasons of the year, it is impossible that one man
should be constantly employed in any one of them. This imposs-
ibility of making so complete and entire a separation of all the
different branches of labour employed in agriculture is perhaps the
reason why the improvement of the productive powers of labour
in this art does not always keep pace with their improvement in
manufactures. The most opulent nations, indeed, generally excel
all their neighbours in agriculture as well as in manufactures; but
they are commonly more distinguished by their superiority in the
latter than in the former. Their lands are in general better cultiv-
ated, and having more labour and expense bestowed upon them,
produce more in proportion to the extent and natural fertility of
the ground. But this superiority of produce is seldom much more
than in proportion to the superiority of labour and expense. In
agriculture, the labour of the rich country is not always much more
productive than that of the poor; or, at least, it is never so much
THE DIVISION OF LABOUR
7
more productive as it commonly is in manufactures. The corn of
the rich country, therefore, will not always, in the same degree of
goodness, come cheaper to market than that of the poor. The corn
of Poland, in the same degree of goodness, is as cheap as that of
France, notwithstanding the superior opulence and improvement
of the latter country. The corn of France is, in the corn provinces,
fully as good, and in most years nearly about the same price with
the corn of England, though, in opulence and improvement,
France is perhaps inferior to England. The corn-lands of England,
however, are better cultivated than those of France, and the corn-
lands of France are said to be much better cultivated than those
of Poland. But though the poor country, notwithstanding the in-
feriority of its cultivation, can, in some measure, rival the rich in
the cheapness and goodness of its corn, it can pretend to no such
competition in its manufactures; at least if those manufactures suit
the soil, climate, and situation of the rich country. The silks of
France are better and cheaper than those of England, because the
silk manufacture, at least under the present high duties upon the
importation of raw silk, does not so well suit the climate of Eng-
land as that of France. But the hardware and the coarse woollens
of England are beyond all comparison superior to those of France,
and much cheaper too in the same degree of goodness. In Poland
there are said to be scarce any manufactures of any kind, a few of
those coarser household manufactures excepted, without which no
country can well subsist.
This great increase of the quantity of work which, in con-
sequence of the division of labour, the same number of people are
capable of performing, is owing to three different circumstances;
first, to the increase of dexterity in every particular workman;
secondly, to the saving of the time which is commonly lost in
nan
passing from one species of work to another; and lastly, to the
invention of a great number of machines which facilitate and
abridge labour, and enable one man to do the work of many.
First, the improvement of the dexterity of the workman neces-
sarily increases the quantity of the work he can perform; and the
division of labour, by reducing every man's business to some one
simple operation, and by making this operation the sole employ-
ment of his life, necessarily increases very much the dexterity of
the workman. A common smith, who, though accustomed to
handle the hammer, has never been used to make nails, if upon
some particular occasion he is obliged to attempt it, will scarce, I