THE WEALTH OF NATIONS
8
am assured, be able to make above two or three hundred nails in
a day, and those too very bad ones. A smith who has been accus-
tomed to make nails, but whose sole or principal business has not
been that of a nailer, can seldom with his utmost diligence make
more than eight hundred or a thousand nails in a day. I have seen
several boys under twenty years of age who had never exercised
any other trade but that of making nails, and who, when they
exerted themselves, could make, each of them, upwards of two
thousand three hundred nails in a day. The making of a nail,
however, is by no means one of the simplest operations. The same
person blows the bellows, stirs or mends the fire as there is occa-
sion, heats the iron, and forges every part of the nail: in forging
the head too he is obliged to change his tools. The different opera-
tions into which the making of a pin, or of a metal button, is
subdivided, are all of them much more simple, and the dexterity
of the person, of whose life it has been the sole business to perform
them, is usually much greater. The rapidity with which some
of the operations of those manufactures are performed, exceeds
what the human hand could, by those who had never seen
them, be supposed capable of acquiring.
Secondly, the advantage which is gained by saving the time
commonly lost in passing from one sort of work to another is much
greater than we should at first view be apt to imagine it. It is
impossible to pass very quickly from one kind of work to another
that is carried on in a different place and with quite different tools.
A country weaver, who cultivates a small farm, must lose a good
deal of time in passing from his loom to the field, and from the
field to his loom. When the two trades can be carried on in the
same workhouse, the loss of time is no doubt much less. It is even
in this case, however, very considerable. A man commonly saun-
ters a little in turning his hand from one sort of employment to
another. When he first begins the new work he is seldom very keen
and hearty; his mind, as they say, does not go to it, and for some
time he rather trifles than applies to good purpose. The habit of
sauntering and of indolent careless application, which is naturally,
or rather necessarily acquired by every country workman who is
obliged to change his work and his tools every half hour, and to
apply his hand in twenty different ways almost every day of his
life, renders him almost always slothful and lazy, and incapable of
any vigorous application even on the most pressing occasions. In-
dependent, therefore, of his deficiency in point of dexterity, this
THE DIVISION OF LABOUR
9
cause alone must always reduce considerably the quantity of work
which he is capable of performing.
Thirdly, and lastly, everybody must be sensible how much
labour is facilitated and abridged by the application of proper
machinery. It is unnecessary to give any example. I shall only
observe, therefore, that the invention of all those machines by
which labour is so much facilitated and abridged seems to have
been originally owing to the division of labour. Men are much
more likely to discover easier and readier methods of attaining any
object when the whole attention of their minds is directed towards
that single object than when it is dissipated among a great variety
of things. But in consequence of the division of labour, the whole
of every man's attention comes naturally to be directed towards
some one very simple object. It is naturally to be expected, there-
fore, that some one or other of those who are employed in each
particular branch of labour should soon find out easier and readier
methods of performing their own particular work, wherever the
nature of it admits of such improvement. A great part of the
machines made use of in those manufactures in which labour is
most subdivided, were originally the inventions of common work-
men, who, being each of them employed in some very simple
operation, naturally turned their thoughts towards finding out
easier and readier methods of performing it. Whoever has been
much accustomed to visit such manufactures must frequently have
been shown very pretty machines, which were the inventions of
such workmen in order to facilitate and quicken their own particu-
lar part of the work. In the first fire-engines, a boy was constantly
employed to open and shut alternately the communication between
the boiler and the cylinder, according as the piston either ascended
or descended. One of those boys, who loved to play with his
man
companions, observed that, by tying a string from the handle of
the valve which opened this communication to another part of the
machine, the valve would open and shut without his assistance,
and leave him at liberty to divert himself with his play-fellows.
One of the greatest improvements that has been made upon this
machine, since it was first invented, was in this manner the dis-
covery of a boy who wanted to save his own labour.
All the improvements in machinery, however, have by no
means been the inventions of those who had occasion to use the
machines. Many improvements have been made by the ingenuity
of the makers of the machines, when to make them became the